This project is designed to perform analysis on real life oil and gas production volume using R and Spotfire. Oil and Gas production usually comes in daily production but the cumulative monthly production is used for this analysis. In other to increase or improve oil and gas production volume, the completion engineers perform what is known as completion trials. The completion trial is carried out by either increasing the amount of proppant (sand) pumped or the number of perforation stages. When the proppant or stages is increased based on well or production zone, the production output is been monitored and a positive result of increasing this parameters will be the new standard for such production zone.

This project is in two parts. The first part uses a tool known as TIBCO Spotfire analytics to visualize the existing production volume by production zone. Visualizing the oil and gas volume, we can see the actual volume and the production zone that are prolific in production. The second part of the project uses R language to try to predict the impact on production when the number of stages or the amount of proppant is increased. Carrying out this predictive analysis will help to reduce or eliminate the risk of spending millions of dollars in carrying out completion trials on a well bases without any significant impact on production.  

The dataset used in this project is a public dataset from IHS. IHS is an oil and gas data repository for all oil and gas company producing in the United State. Specifically, this dataset is for an organization known as HESS, and the data used is a production data from 1959 to 2017. The actual data contain 47, 800 observations and 53 variables. To comfortable perform the predictive analyses in R the variable was reduced to 8.

In this project, we started by preparing the dataset - Removing Na’s, cleansing and scaled the dataset. We fitted the scaled dataset into a cluster of 5 in other to determine the relationship between the variables. We then perform a ranking of the dataset based on how important the oil is to the predictor variable. We also looked at the correlation between oil and gas variable with the use of carat package in R. We then placed the dataset into a machine learning algorithm to predict the number of wells requiring certain number of stages and expected volume of proppant.  We used Random Forest and Decision Tree as our choice of machine learning algorithm. We also use a 10-fold cross validation to confirm that our model is well fitted and check the accuracy of our project. 

The output of this model confirms that there are certain number of wells that are completed with low stages and high proppant volume but requires high stages and high proppant. Been able to complete and predict this model will help to reduce completion trials that cost millions of dollars thereby saving a lot of money for the company.
